# Ancient secretory pathways contributed to the evolutionary origin of an ecologically impactful bioluminescence system

Lisa Y. Mesrop*, Gigi Minsky,  Michael S. Drummond, Jessica A. Goodheart, Stephen Proulx, Todd H. Oakley

*Corresponding author: Lisa Yeter Mesrop

Email: lmesrop@ucsb.edu 

# Abstract 

Evolutionary innovations in chemical secretion – such as the production of secondary metabolites, pheromones, and toxins – are fundamental to ecological interactions across a wide diversity of life. These secretory innovations may involve a “legacy-plus-innovation” mode of evolution, whereby new biochemical pathways are integrated with conserved secretory processes to create novel products. Among secretory innovations, bioluminescence is important because it evolved convergently many times to influence predator-prey interactions, while often producing courtship signals linked to increased rates of speciation. However, the extent to which bioluminescence follows a legacy-plus-innovation mode of secretory evolution remains unexplored. Here, we show that in the ostracod *Vargula tsujii*, luciferase is not only co-expressed with many conserved genes, including those related to toxin production and high-out protein secretory processes, but also with a significant number of novel genes. Our results demonstrate that the legacy-innovation mode of secretory evolution, previously applied to sensory modalities of olfaction, gustation, and nociception, also includes light-producing signals generated by bioluminescent secretions. This extension broadens the paradigm of secretory evolution to include not only chemical signals but also light as an important medium of ecological interaction and evolutionary innovation.

## Supplementary material R Juypter notebooks 

Supplementary material that includes code, tables, and figures can be found in R Juypter Notebook 1 and Jupyter Notebook 2. 

[Juypter Notebook](#https://lmesrop.github.io/BCN_publication/Jupyter_NB_1/BCN_supp_Luminous_Ostracod_Mesrop_part_1_of_2.html)
Supp Material for Luminous Ostracod *Vargula tsujii* and non-bioluminescent ostracod *Skogsbergia sp.* 

The R Juypter Notebook serves as a comprehensive repository encompassing most of the scripts and figures relevant to the bioluminescent ostracod *V.tsujii* and non-bioluminescent ostracod *Skogsbergia sp.* analyses outlined in the publication. This notebook includes the following analyses: QC steps, WGCNA, Network Visualization, Network Connectivity, Differential Gene Expression, and GO enrichments.


## Supplementary material to other code, tables, and figures can be found in the Github repository. 


